# `Byar1980`
## Clinical trial of estrogen for treatment of prostate cancer

### Description

These data come from a randomized controlled trial in which men with stage 3 or stage 4 prostate cancer were assigned to either a therapy involving estrogen (at various doses) or a placebo.

The original data has a small number of missing values.  In this version, those values have been imputed with either the median value (for continuous variables) or the most common category (for categorical variables).

### Dimensions

* 502 observations
* 17 variables

### Variables

* `Stage`: Tumor stage
* `Trt`: Treatment assigned (0.2 mg estrogen, 1.0 mg estrogen, 5.0 mg estrogen, placebo)
* `Time`: Time on study (months)
* `Status`: Status at end of study.  One category is `alive`; all other categories correspond to dead, broken down by cause of death.
* `Age`: Age in years
* `wt`: Weight index.  Weight (kg) - Height (cm) + 200
* `pf`: Patient's activity/performance level (normal activity, in bed < 50% daytime, in bed > 50% daytime, confined to bed)
* `hx`: History of cardiovascular disease (1=yes, 0=no)
* `sbp`: Systolic blood pressure (cm Hg)
* `dbp`: Diastolic blood pressure (cm Hg)
* `ekg`: Result of electrocardiogram (normal, benign, various disease indicators)
* `hg`: Serum hemoglobin (g/100mL)
* `sz`: Size of primary tumor (cm<sup>2</sup>)
* `sg`: Combined index of tumor stage and grade
* `ap`: Serum prostatic acid phosphatase (ng/mL)
* `bm`: Bone metastasis (1=yes, 0=no)
* `Date`: Calendar date patient was enrolled in study

### Reference

I obtained the data from `http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu`.  The original source is

> Byar DP, Green SB (1980). The choice of treatment for cancer patients based on covariate information.  *Bulletin du Cancer*, **67**:477-488.
