---
desc: Surface sensing in swarming bacteria
rows: 8
cols: 5138
ext: rds
code: "readRDS(url('https://github.com/IowaBiostat/data-sets/raw/main/Gode2011/Gode2011.rds'))"
---

### Description

In a liquid, bacteria swim around seeking nutrients with the aid of a polar
flagellum.  On a surface, however, certain species of bacteria can reorganize
their cellular structure on a massive scale, growing large numbers of lateral
flagella and allowing the bacteria to swarm over the surface.  The basic
question of interest in this study is how exactly some bacteria species
recognize that they are on a surface.

To eliminate confounding effects from the environmental background (liquid vs
surface), the researchers employed a mechanism that forced the bacteria into
swimmer and swarmer states -- i.e., to grow swarmer cells in a liquid and
swimmer cells on a plate.  The study consisted of measuring gene expression
under four experimental conditions: swimmer cells grown on a plate, swimmer
cells grown in a liquid, swarmer cells grown on a plate, and swarmer cells grown
in a liquid.  The primary goal is to find genes that are specifically turned on
(or off) in response to a swarmer cell growing on a plate -- not just growing on
a plate or just the swarmer cell type, but when the two are combined.

The species of bacteria in this study is called Vibrio parahaemolyticus.

### Elements

* `Y`: Gene expression measurements, normalized and on the log<sub>2</sub> scale.  Here, each row represents a gene.
* `expCond`: A data frame listing the experimental conditions in each sample with respect to `Environment` (plate, liquid) and `Celltype` (swimmer, swarmer)
* `geneInfo`: A named vector corresponding to the rows of `Y` providing information about the function of each gene, if it is known (the V. parahaemolyticus genome is less well-annotated than the human genome).

### Reference

> Gode-Potratz C, Kustusch R, Breheny P, Weiss D and McCarter L (2011). Surface sensing in Vibrio parahaemolyticus triggers a programme of gene expression that promotes colonization and virulence. *Molecular Microbiology*, **79**: 240-263.
